---
title: "A study of HashMap in Java"
tags: Java HashMap
---

###  intro
* inherited from Map interface
* key and value could be null (different from hashtable)
* asynchronize (different from hashtabel)
* so if we want a thread safe HashMap, we should do the following:
{% highlight Java %}
Map map = new Collections.sychronizedMap(new HashMap());
{% endhighlight %}

### data structure
* array and linkedList 
* find hash value accroding to hashcode(calculate hashcode based on key, then calculate hashvalue based on hashcode. If the hashvalue is appeared before, the collision occur.)
* the collision is handled by linkedList.
* HashMap is an array which stores a static inner class called Entry.
* Entry has the following attribute: hashcode, key, value, and next;
* next is another Entry. With next, an LinkedList is implemented. This LinkedList is used for handling the collision.

### load factor
* loadFactor indicate the degree to which the elements of the Hashtable are filled. The default loadFactor is 0.75. If we set a greater loadfactor, the sapce using efficiency is improved, but the possibility of collision is increased which means a longer time to find an element due to the increasing length of linkedList. However, if we set a smaller loadfactor, the more cells in the map are null. thus, we may waste more space. 
* The array length of the hashmap always be 2 to some int value. This aims to decrease the possibility of collision.

### resize
* with the increasing number of element in the array, we need to resize the array. During this procedure, a new array which size is double to the old array is created. After new array is created, the the element in the old array will be put into the new array. But this process is the most performance consuming due to the fact that each element's hashcode need to be recalculated. 

### fail-fast mechanism 
* java.util.HashMap is not thread safe. Thus, if other thread modified the map, a ConcurrentModificationException exception will be thrown. 
* The detection of wheather other threads modified the map is implemented by an integer, ie modCount. Every time modifying the map will increase the value of modCount. 



